=head1 NAME

Roadmap and vision statement for year 2004

=head1 TASK INFORMATION

=over 4

=item B<Date>

$Date: 2009-01-07 14:42:32 $

=item B<Revision>

$Revision: 1.10 $

=item B<Status>

New

=back

=head1 ABSTRACT

This document explains the Dicole vision and roadmap for year 2004. The primary
goal of this document is to describe qualities we find important to be included
in a learning environment. The tools we build will be priorized and reflected
based on these statements.

=head1 DETAILS

=head2 Goals

Dicole Learning Environment (later we will use the abbreviation I<Dicole>) is
a web-based learning environment built around the following principles: 

B<Pedagogical goals>

=over 4

=item *

I<Dialogic> - Able to support and facilitate learning and working in groups

=item *

I<Value added> - Does not replace the face-to-face communication but enriches it
with modern technology and extends it with things that are not possible
face-to-face

=item *

I<Independent> - Does not force certain pedagogy but instead allows the teacher to
design what kind of pedagogy to use

=item *

I<Scaffolding> - Through usability and scaffolding means, reduce the load on the
cognitive process, helping the students to focus on what is important 

=item *

I<Customizable> - Support commonly used scenarios separately or integrated:
self-regulated learning, teaching subjects by familiarizing one with certain
instructional material or supporting construction of new knowledge through
collaborative learning process

=back

B<Usability goals>

=over 4

=item *

From beginner simplicity to expert complexity without sacrificing any of the
above goals: possibility to introduce new features as understanding of the
environment increases 

=item *

Easy customization of layout, interface and functionality to support different
interest groups 

=back

B<Technological goals>

=over 4 

=item * 

Cross-platform compatibility through the support of common platforms (Unix,
GNU/Linux, Mac, Windows) and browsers (Internet Explorer, Mozilla/Firefox,
Netscape, Safari, Konqueror, Opera)

=item *

Extended integration possibilities through the support of a wide variety of
relational databases (MySQL, Microsoft SQL Server, Sybase, Oracle, PostgreSQL)
and centralized management of user information (LDAP) 

=item *

Interoperability through the support of standards of meta data (L<Dublin
Core|http://www.dublincore.org>, IEEE LOM, L<IMS|http://www.imsglobal.org>)
and content exchange (L<RDF|http://www.w3.org/RDF/>,
L<RSS|http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-syntax-grammar/>)

=item *

Easy customization, integration and rapid development achieved through means of
L<FLOSS|http://www.infonomics.nl/FLOSS/report/> (Free/Libre and Open Source Software)  

=back

One of the main goals of the project is not to reinvent what other learning
environments are already able to do, but extend those possibilities by
introducing new possibilities and features which are lacking at the moment in
the currently available environments.  

This doesn't necessarily mean re-inventing the wheel in the first place but to
create something new through contradiction of existing knowledge. The
collaborative Open Source software development model aims to bring together the
end users and developers, resulting in a pool of a wide variety of expertise. 

=head2 Why Free/Open Source Software?

Dicole is Free Software and Open Source because it is released under the MPL/GPL/LGPL
triple license. For more information of MPL/GPL/LGPL triple licensing strategy,
see (L<Mozilla Relicensing FAQ|http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/relicensing-faq.html>).
The license combination protects the software's and its user's freedom to use, modify and
distribute Dicole.

Being Free Software is an important requirement for a next generation computer
supported learning environment. By free we do not mean price but freedom. While
there are all kinds of freedoms like freedom of speech and freedom of religion,
Free Software represents the freedom of technology. 

Imagine a class room where the school administration or the teachers are not
able to influence how the teaching is carried out in detail in the class room.
Even some of the tools and methods they would use are prohibited and almost
impossible or too expensive to adopt. This is the spirit of proprietary
web-based learning environments, which are strictly controlled through the
intellectual property rights and licensing by their respective owners. 

These companies judge and value the features and possibilities they build and
make available by market share and number of possible paying customers. The
attitude - "we know what is better for you ... and for us" - results in a major
problem: while the software is built to include a wide range of features useful
to a number of paying customers, the special interest groups and the important
details like security, scalability and usability get less attention. 

Many educational institutions have fallen for attractive proprietary learning
platforms. First a company offers one for free and once the staff is educated
and hooked with the new technology, the charges hit in. Moving to a new platform
or staying with the current one get both very expensive. This is a scenario that
could not easily happen with Free Software because the user is not dependent of
the vendor and the vendor's motives. In other words, you can modify and maintain
it yourself or select your service provider. 

Web-based education and related tools are too important to be owned by a single
entity. For that reason a rational business model for free educational tools
should not build upon exclusive monopoly over the existence of such a
technology. There are other options like offering content, training, support and
services. 

Since learning, education and local physical learning environments their self
are not strictly controlled and owned by certain companies or entities, so must
not technological tools and environments of education. 

=head2 Scalability as a guiding principle

With scalability we don't mean scalable technology, although that is an
important goal. More like we mean the scalability of usability. With usability
we mean pedagogical usability or to be more specific, independence. This means
that the teacher could plan ahead the flow of the course and what pedagogical
methods to use. This level of customization is hard to achieve since no one has
made it before from that point of view. It has to be invented. The key is in how
the technology of the learning environment could support the process of choosing
the teaching and learning methods to use.

Every teacher has emphasis on different things. One prefers a more
content oriented method, other a more collaborative learning oriented method.
Limiting this freedom makes the environment less suitable for many. The decision
of what method to use leads to what tools to use. The freedom to select the
tools to use is not technically hard to achieve.

If we attack this idea more accurately, we notice that the individual tools
should stretch to support the methods the teacher is willing to use. For example, the
discussion forums should be more process-oriented instead of being loose if the
teacher chooses to adapt the principles of problem based learning. A teacher who
has a lot of emphasis on self-regulation and improving metacognition skills should be
able to use scaffolding features and enable students to write their own learning
diary.

If we want this level of freedom we notice that it is not achieved by filling
our tools with loads of features that support almost everything. The result will
be a big mess which would be impossible to use. Better approach is to implement
features that are important for different styles of teaching and creating tools
that allow customizing the available features. This is the level
of flexibility that allows designing the pedagogy to use with the help of
various tools.

The barrier for creating customization tools of this magnitude is the learning
curve required to understand and exploit the possibilities of such tools. In
that sense it is a good idea to create so called pedagogy wizards. The teacher
creates a course and launches such a wizard which will ask different kind of
opinions. Based on these opinions the system would automatically customize the
tools, hiding unnecessary features. Later when the teacher becomes more familiar
of the process, a tool for creating fine-grained solutions could be made
available.

=head2 Central tools

Advancement is essential for evolution, so we are not here to re-invent the
wheel. Instead we have chosen a couple of tools which should be done right from
the beginning and preferably make them contain something new through critical
evaluation, continuous mixing of existing knowledge and filling in gaps. 

Based on a simple field evaluation and personal experience we tried to separate
tools that teachers consider important. The wishes were different depending of
pedagogical principles and level of understanding of the web-based learning. We
combined content oriented and collaborative learning oriented wishes and argue
that the following tools are important:

=over 4

=item *

content management features for managing instructional material

=item *

tools for testing the understanding of the instructional material

=item *

discussion forums or some other central place for group communication

=item *

learning diary for evaluating personal learning

=back

We consider tools like calendar, webmail and school administration level tools
less essential when we are looking for tools that have practical pedagogical
value. Many are willing to see such tools in a learning environment, yet they
do already exist. It would make more sense to integrate them since there is no
point in creating such tools from scratch.

What comes to course or group dynamics inside the learning environment is a
totally different thing. Those features just have to exist and are of course
considered as important tools. However we are not going to focus on those things
because yet again we argue that they have no real pedagogical use.

The important thing to know about course and group dynamics we emphasize is that
our starting point to a learning environment is the individual itself and not a
certain course. Based on that principle the user enters the learning
environment always as an individual. She enters her personal space where all her
personal stuff belongs. From there on she joins groups and courses. In that
sense she never enters the environment to take a course. She enters as part
of a community.

There sure are other strong pedagogical tools like various communication tools
and  tools for creating conceptual maps but we consider that those tools have
been developed on a level where they are already useful for web-based
learning. Our objective is to identify what existing parts still have problems
and pay attention to them.

=head1 NOTES AND STATUS

This section should be filled with information and status of the current
implementation of the specifications.

=head1 AUTHORS

Teemu Arina E<lt>teemu@ionstream.fiE<gt>
