=head1 NAME

A plan for implementing a glossary

=head1 TASK INFORMATION

=over 4

=item B<Date>

$Date: 2009-01-07 14:42:32 $

=item B<Revision>

$Revision: 1.3 $

=item B<Severity>

Major

=item B<Priority>

P1

=item B<Risk factor>

2

=item B<Estimate>

No estimate.

=item B<Status>

Waiting for implementation.

=back

=head1 ABSTRACT

This document explains a tool for providing a central glossary for a social
network.

=head1 DETAILS

As social constructivists often point out, it is often characteristic for a
social group to form their own culture and their own language. Because all
networked groups have their own inside meainings for certain words and acronyms,
it is important that a central glossary of terms is provided which allows
writing down the culture and shared meaning of words into a glossary and
possibility to view the meaning once such a word is encountered in the
community writings.

This also helps newcomers to understand the community language and participate
in its activities.

=head2 Creating a glossary

A glossary is an optional tool for a group or course. Once it is selected it
allows defining a glossary of terms.

The glossary has a description, which is displayed in the glossary main page,
describing the content and target group of the glossary. 

Administrators should also be able to define in a public group that a glossary
is global, which means that the terms are highlighted all around the site.

Each new glossary item has the following fields available:

=over 4

=item *

Term. This is the complete sentence of word which is used to identify the
glossary item.

=item *

Synonyms. This is a list of synonyms or keywords for the glossary item, which
should also be linked into this term.

=item *

Description. This is the readable description of the glossary item displayed to
the user.

=item *

Category, in which the term belongs into.

=item *

Author. This is the recorded author who submitted the glossary item.

=back

=head2 Browsing glossaries

Once some terms are submitted to the glossary, it is possible to browse it. It
is possible to sort glossary items by category (even limiting the display to
certain category), by name (ascending or descending) and by author. Also
searching from the glossary by keywords should be possible.

=head2 Linking to a glossary

The linking to the glossary should happen automatically. For example, if you
have the word I<perl> in your text, it should be automatically highlighted and
linked with the glossary item I<Perl>. Clicking the highlighted word or sentence
opens up a popup window with the description of the glossary item and
possibility to close the popup window.

=head2 Towards an advanced glossary

For us just thinking about a simple glossary is not pushing the limits enough,
so I just include some random advanced ideas here for discussion.

It might be possible that instead of a glossary the wiki like
L<group pages|group_pages> are used. This of course requires that the users are
aware that the wiki system could also be used to build a central glossary of
terms. This makes it a little bit difficult to use since glossary is most useful when
the page is opened in a popup window instead of being loaded into the current
window. Maybe a possibility to specify that a certain wiki page is a popup kind
of page and the result is just as it is a glossary?

More investigation in glossary standards should be taken. For example, maybe it
could be possible to specify ontologies between two glossaries, resulting in
possibility to use your own glossary with ontologies specified between the two.
Imagine reading an unfamiliar dialect with the help of your automatic glossary
transformation tool. The text is automatically translated into your own dialect
with the help of a glossary that has some ontologies built-in? Think about that.

More feedback is also welcome in the way how to collaboratively build glossary
terms. With this specification it is left in the hands of the users to find
their own way to morph together their understandings of a certain word. Maybe
the forum system could support moving a summary knowledge artefact as a glossary
item?

=head1 NOTES AND STATUS

This section should be filled with information and status of the current
implementation of the specifications.

=head1 AUTHORS

Teemu Arina E<lt>teemu@ionstream.fiE<gt>
