=head1 NAME

Implementation plan for Learning Diary

=head1 TASK INFORMATION

=over 4

=item B<Date>

$Date: 2009-01-07 14:42:32 $

=item B<Revision>

$Revision: 1.7 $

=item B<Severity>

Major

=item B<Priority>

P1

=item B<Risk factor>

2

=item B<Estimate>

No estimate.

=item B<Status>

Waiting for implementation.

=back

=head1 ABSTRACT

This document explains how Dicole Learning Diary tool should be implemented.

=head1 DETAILS

The Learning Diary is an instrument for evaluating personal learning. It helps
a student to express her experiences, support reflective thinking, improves
self-evaluation (meta-cognition skills) and help recognizing strengths and
weaknesses in personal learning.

Learning Diary is not an occasional tool. It is a daily diary that supports ones
continuous evaluation of learning. It is a place where to write down ideas, what
one has learned and experienced during the day or week. It is also a tool that
motivates to learn further and if necessary, go back to things that were left
unanswered.

It is one of the tools that helps us I<learn to learn>.

=head2 What is so special about web-based Learning Diary?

It is true that it is possible to keep your own Learning Diary on a piece of
paper or within a normal diary book. Learning Diary in web has added value only
when it may be shared and when it becomes easier to write.

Learning Diary is also a tool which itself has a learning curve. The teachers
ability to scaffold student's learning process of the Learning Diary is easier
in the web-context. 

A well written Learning Diary allows displaying portions of the diary to others
or move portions to other areas in the system with ease, like into a
I<Learning Portfolio>, which is actually a selected showcase of student's
learning time-line.

=head2 Implementation

Online Learning Diary should be implemented to at least result in above
functionality. It has the following distinct functional elements:

=over 4

=item B<Add new Learning Diary entry>

The basic functionality of Learning Diary is adding new diary entries. When
adding a new entry the user should first be able to select the category in which
the new entry will be written. The category might be one of the courses where
the student is enrolled in or a custom category. To achieve this functionality
the system should be able to populate a dropdown with the names of the groups
(courses).

The system should also allow adding new custom Learning Diary categories.
Functionality for removing categories might not be necessary, since it could
break the links to diary entries in such categories. Maybe the existing custom
categories could be generated based on distinct category names in the database
of all custom diaries. This way the custom category X gets removed when the last
diary entry in that category ceases to exist (is removed).

As such, selecting the category could look something like this:

  [ Select group... ] or [ Select category... ] or add new [_____]

Notice that we separate group selection and alternative custom category
selection. There is also a free-form text field if the user wants to add a new
custom category.

Then the user writes a topic for the Learning Diary entry (text field) and
contents for the Learning Diary entry (text area).

The user may also link into attachments in the filearea (if such a tool exists)
or upload the attachments directly to be attached to the diary entry.

The data is saved in the database with date when the entry was written. The date
is not available for editing. The content is saved in blocks. The content is
splitted into blocks based on paragraph boundaries (one empty line between
blocks of text). This is because the content may be answered in blocks and later
the Learning Diary might introduce meta-data support for the block entries.

If the course teacher or group administrator wants, she may provide custom
scaffolding for the student who is writing a Learning Diary entry. There are two
types of scaffolding as explained below:

=over 4

=item B<Strong scaffolding>

The teacher represents questions the student should explicitly answer, for
example:

  What do you know of the subject?
  [textarea]
  What should I learn of the subject?
  [textarea]
  ...

Each text area the student fills aims to answer the question. This type of
scaffolding is strong because it requires the student to explicitly answer the
questions the teacher has posed. 

=item B<Light scaffolding>

The teacher provides scaffolding questions for the student while the student is
writing the free-form diary entry. The questions activate thinking in the
student and provides a base for possible influences that guide towards more
quality diary entries. For example:

  [textarea]  What do you know of the subject?
              What should I learn of the subject?

As you can see, the questions are not required to be answered but carefully
crafted to help the student to write more quality diary entries.

=back

The scaffolds the teacher has written may be different depending of the time
line of the course. In the beginning, in the middle, in the beginning of certain
subjects and in the end of the course the questions may vary.

It is of course possible to write entries with the same scaffolds all the time
but soon the same scaffolds become quite familiar for the student. Sooner or
later the student doesn't read the scaffolds. The scaffolds become obsolete and
are not required anymore. This is when the teacher should ideally provide new 
scaffolds that support greater objectives for the student writing the diary
entries.

The system should allow the teacher to pre-define a set of scaffolds for the
course that each activate on a certain date. The teacher should also be able to
select whether or not to use strong or light scaffolding depending of the
experience the students have had in writing Learning Diaries.

=item B<Editing Learning Diary entries>

Providing support for editing Learning Diary entries is not suggested, because
a diary entry happened already and represent the student's thinking like it was
on a certain point of time. Editing should be only possible during a 24 hour
period starting of the creation date of the diary entry. After that the diary
entry is permanent and saved in the database.

=item B<Removing Learning Diary entries>

The same logic applies to removing diary entries as we have in editing diary
entries above.

=item B<Viewing Learning Diary entries>

Viewing Learning Diary entries is the same as listing them. The user should be
able to list Learning Diary entries according to certain rules like sorting them
chronologically according to custom category or course name. The view should
allow limiting the page to display a certain ammount of entries and splitting
the rest into multiple pages for more intuitive usability and faster page loads.

=item B<Archiving Learning Diaries>

When the student has finished a certain course or a similar learning session
that has a start and an end, it should be possible to archive these past
diaries. This is simply done by moving a past diary to an archive section in the
Learning Diary tool.

=item B<Sharing Learning Diary Among Other Users>

The user should be able allow other users to view her diaries. The user may also
allow members of a certain group or a custom list of users to view the entries
of specified diaries. This option allows Learning Diary to be used as a I<BLOG>,
which is nowadays pretty common practice in the web.

=item B<Exporting parts of Learning Diaries>

The user should be able to export parts of her Learning Diary as single files
out of the system. This should help the user to easily incorporate some diary
entries to separate reports and such. 

These files should be in some standard format like XML or just simple ASCII
text, what ever is considered as sufficient.

The user may also export parts of the Learning Diary into supported tools like
filearea (in the same format as used above) or I<Learning Portfolio>.

=back

=head1 NOTES AND STATUS

This section should be filled with information and status of the current
implementation of the specifications.

=head1 AUTHORS

Teemu Arina E<lt>teemu@ionstream.fiE<gt>
