=head1 NAME

Plan for a quiz/test/survey application

=head1 TASK INFORMATION

=over 4

=item B<Date>

$Date: 2009-01-07 14:42:32 $

=item B<Revision>

$Revision: 1.3 $

=item B<Severity>

Major

=item B<Priority>

P1

=item B<Risk factor>

2

=item B<Estimate>

No estimate.

=item B<Status>

Waiting for implementation.

=back

=head1 ABSTRACT

This document explains a tool for providing surveys and generating quizzes.

=head1 DETAILS

In typical class setting it is common that understanding is tested with a simple
assessment that may contain single choice, multiple choice, written essay or
other types of questions.

This is different in online learning, although some build their online courses
and provide the final test in ways common in traditional instruction. It is no
surprice that testing understanding in online courses with online survey 
tools is not considered as a good thing by some people. There is much more room
for cheating and in that sense online assessments should not affect that much
the resulting grade.

I personally see an online survey tool important for collecting feedback and
surveys from participants of the online course. For some it is also a good
personal evaluation tool for self-regulated learning. Once you have read a book,
an online survey of the book topics could refresh your mind about what you have
read and hint you about possible gaps in your understanding.

To not limit the pedagogical possibilities, it could also be used for testing
how well students remember certain topics. In light of current scientific
research statically memorizing things do not necessarily lead to learning, but
of course you are for example required to remember certain words in order to
build up sentences.

Another reason for the existence of such a tool is to make sure some students
have actually become familiar with the material before a certain event. A survey
of that material does not affect the grade but the teacher receives important
information like who have read some of the material and who haven't.

That kind of information is often necessary for deciding what to do with the
next lesson that requires collaborative participation in a game and where
knowledge of the underlying material is important. Students who did not do their
homework could do something more productive instead of ruining the lesson while
others participate in the collaborative game. 

=head2 Creating a survey

Creating a survey in a course allows selecting the following general things for
the survey:

=over 4

=item *

Title of the survey to identify the survey in question.

=item *

Time of availability of the survey. Includes start and end time of the
availability period. Outside the period the survey is hidden.

=item *

Multi-page survey. Multi-page survey has each question on a single page, instead
of all questions on one page. Multi-page survey allows also defining the
duration of the survey, in other words how much time one has to complete the survey.

=item *

Grading. If there is no grading, it is a simple survey for collecting feedback.
This affects the functionality and display in that sense that the survey has no
correct answers or resulting grade.

=item *

Statistics availability. Normally no statistics are provided and in the quiz the
one who took the test is able to see results of the quiz only if defined so.
This controls if the survey takers may see the group statistics, i.e. what the
average results were for everyone etc.

=back

Here is the quiz and test specific features. The grading option specifies if
these additional features are available:

=over 4

=item *

Minimum grade for passing the quiz. It is possible to define number of points
for answers, so this is the minimum grade required for passing the test.

=item *

Number of attempts. This controls how many times one is able to redo the test.

=item *

Optional additional attempts. This controls if it is possible to try the test
again without affecting the resulting grade. The first record is kept as the
grade and the additional attempts are only for practice.

=item *

Immediately provide correct answers. This controls if the system points out the
correct results once the test is made. If this is not turned on only the
resulting grade is provided.

=item *

If the survey does not contain open-ended questions
which require teacher interaction, the resulting grade is immediatly provided.

=back

=head2 Creating questions

creating a question allows inputting the question. The question may be text or
media. It is also possible to specify labels, which allow dividing the
survey into clear chapters.

There are multiple ways to provide the answers:

=over 4

=item *

Single choice with either radio buttons or a dropdown. Allows selecting one
single answer. In surveys allows creating a freeform "something else" field or
textarea for reasoning why a certain answer was chosen.

=item *

Multiple choice with checkboxes. Allows selecting multiple answers to one
question. In surveys allows creating a freeform "something else" field or
textarea for reasoning why a certain answer was chosen.

=item *

Freeform single line. Allows entering one textfield with specified length as an
answer.

=item *

Freeform multiple lines. Allows inputting a number of textfields as the answer.
Optionally the textfields must contain answers in a specified order.

=item *

Freeform open-ended. Allows entering an essay answer to the provided question
with a simple text area.

=item *

Matching pairs. The classic draw line from item to item. Allows input of
multiple x matches y, where all y are placed in a dropdown associated with each
x.

=item *

Matching with decoys. Another way to do matching pairs is by defining all
options of y for each x. This allows inputting decoys that do not actually match
with anything.

=item *

Range. Allows selecting one option out of range of 1 to 5. Possible to specify
titles for each range fragment.

=back

If grading is enabled, allows specifying the following things:

=over 4

=item *

Correct answer.

=item *

Maximum points received for a correct answer.

=item *

Scoring type. All or nothing, afterwards by teacher (for open-ended answers, for
example) or cumulative, where all partly correct answers are counted.

=back

=head2 Statistics

Once a survey or quiz has been completed, statics for the answer become
available for the survey arranger. The statistics allow displaying result of
each survey individually, how many times one took the survey, how long it took
to complete the survey and a summary of all answers with graphs and averages.

=head1 NOTES AND STATUS

This section should be filled with information and status of the current
implementation of the specifications.

=head1 AUTHORS

Teemu Arina E<lt>teemu@ionstream.fiE<gt>
